---
layout: post
title: 1. Queue & Stack : Queue and BFS
category: Queue & Stack
tag: Queue & Stack
---

# 1. Introduction

- We may access a random element by index in Array. However, we might want to restrict the processing order in some cases.
- we introduce two different processing orders, First-in-First-out and Last-in-First-out and its two corresponding linear data structures, Queue and Stack.
- We go through the definition, implementation and built-in functions for each data structure.
- Then, we focus more on the practical applications of these two data structures.
- By completing this card, you should be able to:
  - Understand the principle of the processing orders of FIFO and LIFO
  - Implement these two data structures
  - Be familiar with the built-in queue and stack structure
  - Solve basic queue-related problems, especially **BFS(Breadth-Frist Search)**
  - Solve basic stack-related problems problems
  - Understand how system stack helps you when you solve problems using **DFS(Depth-First Search)** and other **recursion** algorithms

# 2. Queue and BFS

- One common application of Breadth-first Search (BFS) is to find the shortest path from the root node to the target node.
- In this article, we provide an example to explain how queue is applied in a BFS algorithm step by step.


> Example
Here we provide an example to show how BFS is used to find the shortest path between the root node A and the target node G.


[video](https://leetcode.com/explore/learn/card/queue-stack/231/practical-application-queue/1376/)


## 3. Insights
- After watching the animation above, let's answer the following questions:
  - What is the processing order of the nodes?
    - In the first round, we process the root node. In the second round, we process the nodes next to the root node; in the third round, we process the nodes which are two steps from the root node; so on and so forth.
    - Similar to tree's level-order traversal, **the nodes closer to the root node will be traversed earlier.**
    - If a node X is added to the queue in the kth round, the length of the shortest path between the root node and X is exactly k.
    - That is to say, you are already in the shortest path the first time you find the target node.
  - What is the enqueue and dequeue order of the queue?
    - As shown in the animation above, we first enqueue the root node.
    - Then in each round, we process the nodes which are already in the queue one by one and add all their neighbors to the queue.
    - It is worth noting that the newly-added nodes will not be traversed immediately but will be processed in the next round.
    - The processing order of the nodes is the exact same order as how they were added to the queue, which is First-in-First-out (FIFO). That's why we use a queue in BFS.

## 4. BFS - Template
- Previously, we have already introduced two main scenarios of using BFS:
  - traversal or find the shortest path.
- Typically, it happens in a tree or a graph. As we mentioned in the chapter description, BFS can also be used in more abstract scenarios.
- In this article, we will provide you with a template. Then, we provide some exercise after this article for practice.
  - It will be important to determine the nodes and the edges before doing BFS in a specific question
  - Typically, the node will be an actual node or a status while the edge will be an actual edge or a possible transition.

### Example(walls and gates)
- You are given a m x n 2D grid initialized with these three possible values.
  - -1 - A wall or an obstacle.
  - 0 - A gate.
  - INF - Infinity means an empty room. We use the value 231 - 1 = 2147483647 to represent INF as you may assume that the distance to a gate is less than 2147483647.
- Fill each empty room with the distance to its nearest gate. If it is impossible to reach a gate, it should be filled with INF.

> map

- Given the 2D grid

```
INF  -1  0  INF
INF INF INF  -1
INF  -1 INF  -1
  0  -1 INF INF
```

- After running your function, the 2D grid should be:

```
3  -1   0   1
2   2   1  -1
1  -1   2  -1
0  -1   3   4
```

- Understand the problem:
  - It is very classic backtracking problem. We can start from each gate (0 point), and searching for its neighbors. We can either use DFS or BFS solution.

```cpp
class Solution {
public:
    void wallsAndGates(vector<vector<int>>& rooms) {
        if (rooms.empty()) return;
        int m = rooms.size(), n = rooms[0].size();
        queue<pair<int, int>> q;
        for (int i = 0; i < m; i++) {
            for (int j = 0; j < n; j++) {
                if (!rooms[i][j]) q.push({i, j});
            }
        }

        for (int d = 1; !q.empty(); d++) {
            for (int k = q.size(); k; k--) {
                int i = q.front().first, j = q.front().second;
                q.pop();
                add(rooms, q, i - 1, j, m, n, d);
                add(rooms, q, i + 1, j, m, n, d);
                add(rooms, q, i, j - 1, m, n, d);
                add(rooms, q, i, j + 1, m, n, d);
            }
        }
    }
private:
    void add(vector<vector<int>> &rooms, queue<pair<int, int>> &q, int i, int j, int m, int n, int d) {
        if (i >= 0 && i < m && j >= 0 && j < n && rooms[i][j] > d) {
            q.push({i, j});
            rooms[i][j] = d;
        }
    }

};
```

### vector<vector<int>>
- vector of vectors of int as follows:

```cpp
vector<vector<int>> v;
```

- above definition results in an empty two-dimensional vector.
- in order to use it, we have to define vector size and allocate storage for its elements.
- there are several methods to grow a two-dimensional vector with help of resize() or push_back() functions or using the fill constructor or initializer lists.

1. resize() function
  - the resize() function is used to resize a vector to the specified size. we can use it to initialize a vector of vectors as shown below

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

#define R 4
#define C 5

int main()
{
	// instantiate a vector of R objects of type vector<int>
	// and resize each object to size C
	vector<vector<int>> mat(R);
	for (int i = 0 ; i < R ; i++)
		mat[i].resize(C);

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```

  - we can picture a vector of vectors as a two-dimensional array consisting of R rows and C columns. here's alternative version of above code which uses overloaded version of the resize() function which accepts the container size, and the object to be copied in that container

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

#define R 4
#define C 5

int main()
{
	// instantiate vector object of type vector<int>
	vector<vector<int>> mat;

	// resize the vector to R elements of type vector<int>, each having size C
	mat.resize(R, std::vector<int>(C));

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```

2. push_back() function
  - another plausible way of initializing a vector of vectors is to use the push_back() function which adds a given element at the end of the vector.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

#define R 4
#define C 5

int main()
{
	// instantiate vector object of type vector<int> and
	// use push_back() function to resize it
	vector<vector<int>> mat;
	for (int i = 0; i < R; i++)
	{
		// construct a vector of int
		vector<int> v;
		for (int j = 0; j < C; j++)
			v.push_back(0);

		// push back above one-dimensional vector
		mat.push_back(v);
	}

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```

> result

```
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
```

  - note when dimensions R and C are Large, above code suffers from potential performance penalties caused by frequent re-allocation of memory by push_back() function.
  - this should be used only when vector dimensions are not known in advance

3. Fill Constructor
  - the recommended approach is to use fill constructor of the vector container for constructing a vector of vectors. the fill constructor accepts an initial size n and a value and creates a vector of n elements and fills with the specified default value

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

#define R 4
#define C 5

int main()
{
	// Using the fill constructor to construct a vector of vectors
	vector<vector<int>> mat(R, vector<int>(C));

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```

  - we can split above initialization into two parts
    - first initialize a vector of ints and then use this vector to initialize the vector of vectors using the fill constructor.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

#define R 4
#define C 5

int main()
{
	// first initialize a vector of int
	vector<int> v(C);

	// Use above vector to initialize the vector of vectors
	// using the fill constructor
	vector<vector<int>> mat(R, v);

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```

> result

```
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
```

4. Initializer list
  - Finally, we can use initializer list introduced with c++11 to construct a vector of vectors as shown

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

int main()
{
	// using an initializer list to construct a vector of vectors
	vector<vector<int>> mat {
				{ 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 },
				{ 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 },
				{ 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 },
				{ 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 }
			};

	// print the vector

	return 0;
}
```
